279-[SF]-Lab - Introduction to Identity and Access Management (IAM)
Introduction to AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) Lab

This lab introduces AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM), focusing on managing users, user groups, and policies to control access to AWS resources. The lab simulates a business environment where access control and authentication are critical to secure resources like EC2 instances and S3 buckets.

Objectives

After completing this lab, you will be able to:





Create and apply an IAM password policy



Explore pre-created IAM users and user groups



Inspect IAM policies applied to user groups



Add users to user groups with specific capabilities



Locate and use the IAM sign-in URL



Experiment with the effects of policies on service access

Duration

Approximately 60 minutes

Accessing the AWS Management Console





Choose Start Lab in the upper-right corner of the lab instructions.





Troubleshooting tip: If you encounter an Access Denied error, close the error box and choose Start Lab again.



Monitor the lab status:





Red circle: Lab has not started.



Yellow circle: Lab is starting.



Green circle: Lab is ready.



Once the lab is ready, choose the green circle next to AWS to open the AWS Management Console in a new browser tab.





Tip: If the tab doesn’t open, check for a browser banner or icon blocking pop-ups and allow them.



If prompted, switch to the new Console Home.



Arrange the AWS Management Console tab alongside the lab instructions for easy reference.



Do not change the lab Region unless instructed.

Task 1: Create an Account Password Policy

In this task, you create a custom password policy for your AWS account that applies to all associated users.

Steps





Note the Region displayed in the upper-right corner of the console (e.g., Oregon).



In the AWS Management Console, search for IAM in the search bar and select it.



In the left navigation pane, choose Account settings.



Choose Change password policy.



Configure the following password policy options:





Enforce minimum password length: Set to 10 characters.



Select all checkboxes except Password expiration requires administrator reset.



Enable password expiration: Keep default of 90 days.



Prevent password reuse: Keep default of 5 passwords.



Choose Save changes.

Summary

You strengthened the account’s password requirements, making user passwords more secure and harder to crack.

Task 2: Explore Users and User Groups

In this task, you explore pre-created IAM users and user groups.

Steps





In the left navigation pane, choose Users. The following users are pre-created:





user-1



user-2



user-3



Select user-1 to view its Summary page.





Permissions tab: No permissions assigned.



Groups tab: Not a member of any groups.



Security credentials tab: Assigned a console password.



In the left navigation pane, choose User groups. The following groups are pre-created:





EC2-Admin



EC2-Support



S3-Support



Select EC2-Support and view the Permissions tab.





Attached policy: AmazonEC2ReadOnlyAccess



Expand the policy to view permissions for listing and describing EC2, ELB, CloudWatch, and Auto Scaling resources (read-only access).



Review the IAM policy structure:

{
    "Effect": "Allow" or "Deny",
    "Action": ["cloudwatch:ListMetrics", ...],
    "Resource": ["specific S3 bucket", "specific EC2 instance", "*"]
}



Select S3-Support and view the Permissions tab.





Attached policy: AmazonS3ReadOnlyAccess



Grants permissions to get and list S3 resources.



Select EC2-Admin and view the Permissions tab.





Attached policy: Customer inline policy (EC2-Admin-Policy)



Grants permissions to view (Describe), start, and stop EC2 instances.

Summary

You explored pre-created users and groups, inspected their attached policies, and understood the differences between managed and inline policies.

Business Scenario

Your company is expanding its AWS usage with EC2 instances and S3 storage. Assign permissions to new staff based on their job functions:







User



Group



Permissions





user-1



S3-Support



Read-only access to Amazon S3





user-2



EC2-Support



Read-only access to Amazon EC2





user-3



EC2-Admin



View, start, and stop EC2 instances

Task 3: Add Users to User Groups

In this task, you assign users to groups to inherit the necessary permissions.

Steps





Add user-1 to S3-Support:





In the left navigation pane, choose User groups.



Select S3-Support and go to the Users tab.



Choose Add users, select user-1, and confirm.



Add user-2 to EC2-Support:





Repeat the above steps for user-2 and the EC2-Support group.



Add user-3 to EC2-Admin:





Repeat the above steps for user-3 and the EC2-Admin group.



Verify each group has one user in the Users column.

Summary

You successfully added users to their respective groups, aligning permissions with their job roles.

Task 4: Sign In and Test User Permissions

In this task, you test the permissions of each IAM user using the IAM sign-in URL.

Steps





In the left navigation pane, choose Dashboard and copy the Sign-in URL (e.g., https://123456789012.signin.aws.amazon.com/console) to a text editor.



Open a private browser window:





Firefox: Menu > New Private Window



Chrome: Ellipsis > New Incognito Window



Edge: Ellipsis > New InPrivate Window



Internet Explorer: Tools > InPrivate Browsing



Paste the Sign-in URL into the private window and press Enter.



Test user-1 (S3-Support):





Sign in with:





Username: user-1



Password: Lab-Password1



From the Services menu, choose S3, select a bucket, and browse its contents (should succeed).



From the Services menu, choose EC2 > Instances (should fail with “You are not authorized”).



Sign out.



Test user-2 (EC2-Support):





Sign in with:





Username: user-2



Password: Lab-Password2



Choose EC2 > Instances (should display instances but fail to stop them with “You are not authorized”).



Choose S3 (should fail with “You don’t have permissions to list buckets”).



Sign out.



Test user-3 (EC2-Admin):





Sign in with:





Username: user-3



Password: Lab-Password3



Choose EC2 > Instances, select an instance, and choose Stop instance (should succeed, instance enters Stopping state).



Close the private window.

Summary

You verified that:





user-1 can view S3 buckets but not EC2 instances.



user-2 can view EC2 instances but cannot modify them or access S3.



user-3 can view and stop EC2 instances.

Conclusion

You successfully:





Created and applied an IAM password policy



Explored pre-created IAM users and groups



Inspected IAM policies



Added users to groups with specific permissions



Used the IAM sign-in URL



Tested the effects of policies on service access

Ending the Lab





Choose End Lab at the top of the lab page and confirm with Yes.



Verify the Ended AWS Lab Successfully message.
